                                                                15-NOV-1987

                User Guide for Squeezing Archiver, V1.2 
                ---------------------------------------

  The squeezing archiver allows you to create archives of multiple files
  which are smaller in size than the original size, and to dearchive
  (or recreate) the original files at a later date.

  Obtain the necessary files:
  --------------------------

  Three executable image files are needed to make the Squeezing Archiver
  work, they are available for the downloading from several networks
  including BIX and Compuserve.  The files are:

             FORTSA   -  The FORTRAN V2 standalone loader
             SARCEXE  -  Squeezing Archiver Executable, Part 1
             SARCEXF  -  Squeezing Archiver Executable, Part 2

  If you have a version 2 FORTRAN Boot disk, you don't need the FORTSA
  module.


  Using the FORTRAN Standalone Loader
  -----------------------------------

  If you don't have a version 2 FORTRAN boot disk, you can use the version
  2 standalone loader which is available in the public domain.   This
  file is available on BIX and COMPUSERVE as the following name:

                            99STAND.ARC

  Note this TRAVER archive contains the following files:

                            README
                            FORTSA

  README is a disclaimer from LGMA products.  FORTSA is an EDITOR/ASSEMBLER
  standalone runtime module.

  To boot the standalone module, enter the editor/assembler (item 2 on
  TI menu), and select item (5), run program file.  Enter the name of:

                            DSK1.FORTSA

  for the name of the program.  The program will load, and the screen
  will be displayed:

                              99 FORTRAN
                        Standalone LOAD Module

               Executable Program File Name?

  Enter a file name of:

               DSK1.SARCEXE

  The squeezing archiver will load this file, the file SARCEXF, and
  (barring errors) will automatically start up the squeezing archiver.


  Squeezing Archiver Menu
  -----------------------

  The squeezing archiver main menu will be displayed as follows:

                    99 Squeezing ARCHIVER, V1.2
                           by Alan Beard
                       based on software by:
                      R.Greenlaw/Barry Traver


                      1.  Store Files
                      2.  Squeeze Files
                      3.  Restore Files
                      4.  List Files
                      5.  Exit

                 What is your choice (1 2 3 4)

  Enter a selection, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, and depress the ENTER button.



  Storing/Squeezing Files
  -----------------------

  Item 1 (Store) and item 2 (squeeze) allow creation of an archive from
  non-archived standard TI files.  The STORE function 1 stores the files
  in a "non-compressed" mode, compatible with the TRAVER archiving method.
  The SQUEEZE function 2 compresses the input files using huffman encoding
  techniques.  Item 2 will run much slower than item 1, but the resulting
  archive will be 0 to 60% smaller than the original files.

  Selecting item 1 or 2 results in the message:

           Output File?

  being displayed.  Enter the desired file name of the archive to be created.
  For example, to create an archive named SARC on disk 2, use the name:

           DSK2.SARC

  The message:

           Input Drive (1-6)?

  will be displayed.  Enter the number of the disk drive which contains the
  input files to be archived.

  The name of the diskette in the selected input disk drive will be displayed,
  along with the question:

           Disk = xxxxxxxxxx

           Include All Files (Y/N)?

  If you want all of the files on the input drive to be included in the
  output archive, answer with the letter Y, and ENTER.  If not, enter
  N, and ENTER.

  If you selectively include files (by selecting NO), then the prompt:

           Include yyyyyyyyyy (Y/N)?

  will be displayed for each file "yyyyyyyyyy" on the input disk drive.
  If you want the file to be included, enter the letter Y, ENTER.  If
  not, N, ENTER.

  Before archiving the files, you are presented with a list of the
  files to be archived, and thier sector length (one less than the
  sector length displayed with the Disk Manager).  Press ENTER to
  start the archiving process.

  As each file is processed (archived), a menu is displayed showing the
  start/end sector of the file, and which sector is currently being
  processed.  If this file is a fractured file, the message "Fractured
  File" is displayed on the screen.  

  A non-squeezed file is displayed as "Packing File".  A squeezed file
  actually goes through each file twice,  one for analyzing and one
  for squeezing.   If at the end of the squeeze process it is determined
  that the squeezed file is larger than the original, then the file
  is "re-packed", or stored unsqueezed.  If the file was successfully
  squeezed, a display is shown of the number of 1/2 sectors (128
  byte records) saved, and the percentage save factor.

  When the process is complete, the message:

         Press ENTER to Continue

  is displayed.  Pressing ENTER returns you to the squeezing archiver
  main menu.


  Restore Files
  -------------

  To restore files (unpack, or dearchive), select item 3 and ENTER on the
  squeezing archiver main menu.  This causes the message:

              Archive File Name?

  to be displayed.  Enter the file name of the archive.  For example, to
  unpack an archive located on disk 2, with a file name of SARC, enter
  the name:

              DSK2.SARC

  The message:

              Output Drive (1-6)?

  is displayed.  Enter the number of the disk drive which will contain
  the unpacked (or unsqueezed) files.

  The prompt:

              Include All Files (Y/N)?

  is displayed.  If you want all files in the input archive to be restored,
  then enter Y, ENTER.  If you want to selectively load from the archive,
  enter N, ENTER.

  If you selectively load, then the prompt:

              Include yyyyyyyyyy (Y/N)?

  will be displayed for each file in the input archive.  Enter the letter
  Y (ENTER) or N (ENTER) to pick which files to restore.

  When all files have been selected, a list of the files to be restored
  is displayed, along with the number of input records (1/2 sectors).
  Press ENTER to start the unpacking process.

  A display similar to the one when squeezing/storing files is displayed
  for each file being unpacked.  When the restore process is complete,
  the message:

              Press ENTER to Continue

  is displayed.  Pressing ENTER will return you to the squeezing archiver
  main menu.


  Listing an Archive
  ------------------

  To list the contents of an archive, enter the number 4 and ENTER on
  the squeezing archiver main menu.  This brings up the prompt:

              Archive File Name?

  on the screen.  Enter the name of the input archive file.  For example,
  if the archive was located on disk drive 2 and had a name of SARC, then
  the file name would be:

              DSK2.SARC

  Each file on the archive would then be listed, including the FILENAME, the
  length (in input records, or 1/2 sectors), whether the file is squeezed
  or not (S/N) and the format of the file (e.g. DIS/VAR 80, PROGRM, etc.).


  Special Operating Notes:
  -----------------------

  1. If you are going to upload the archive to a telecommunications
     network, please write protect it.  This is to "work around" difficulties
     of certain telecommunications programs with DIS/FIX/128 files.

  2. It is ok to have the archive file on a RAM disk (e.g. DSK3, DSK5, RD,
     etc.).   The archiver may or may not read the input files (for
     storing/squeezing) or output files (for unpacking) properly.  This
     is because the archiver performs its own sector I/O, with a little
     assist from the DSR routine.  It is suggested for simplicity that
     archiving/dearchiving operations be kept to regular disk drives.

  3. If you are creating an archive for use with the TRAVER archiver,
     use the "store" option (not the "squeeze") option to create it.
     The TRAVER archiver cannot read the squeezed archive properly.

  4. The squeezing archiver appears to operate properly on both the
     TI-99/4A and the MYARC Geneve (using TI-99 emulation mode at
     speed 5).

Send comments, suggestions, gripes, complaints, myrrh, gold and silver to:

                   Alan L. Beard
                   Box 210, RD4
                   AppleButter Hill Road
                   Coopersburg, PA  18036

I can also be reached on BIX (Byte Information Exchange) as user abeard,
or on COMPUSERVE (less frequently) as user 71370,2723.

Enjoy.
